WIP: Tutorial for module in own crate (#141)
substrate-developer-hub/substrate-developer-hub.github.io: docs/tutorials/runtime-module-in-own-crate.md

---
title: "Write a Runtime Module in its Own Crate"
---

In this tutorial you'll write substrate runtime module that lives in its own crate, and include it in a node based on the node-template. If you prefer you can follow along with the [video walkthrough](todo record after initial feedback).

## Setup a Development Environment

> If you haven't already, follow the guide to [install substrate](../getting-started/installing-substrate). You'll need the substrate-up scripts, but not the standard substrate node, so the `--fast` option is what you want here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you haven't already, follow the guide to [install substrate](getting-started/installing-substrate.md). You'll need the substrate-up scripts, but not the standard substrate node, so the `--fast` option is what you want here.

I think this is the better way to reference other documents. It let's Docusaurus resolve the actual path.
```

## Create a new Node Template
We'll begin by creating a brand new node template.
```bash
substrate-node-new modular-chain <your name>
```
If you've followed other runtime tutorials, you've probably started this way.

In this tutorial, we're not going to write our module directly as part of the node template, but rather as a separate rust crate. This approach provides a few advantages:
1. Our module can be easily imported into other nodes in the future.
2. Our module can be published to places like github or crates.io without publishing our entire node in the same place.

We do still need the node template, however, to actually run our module.

## Create a Rust Library Crate
So if our module isn't going to live in the node template, where _is_ it going to live? In a rust library crate. We can create a blank one with
```bash
cargo new --lib test_module
```

> If you aren't familiar with library crates or how to use them in other rust projects, it's probably worth reading the [cargo docs](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/guide/creating-a-new-project.html). In the video walkthrough of this tutorial, I briefly describe a simple number doubling program that uses a library crate for the doubling.

Reviewer: I am not a fan of referencing the video tutorial via the docs. Seems like the docs should live on their own. For example, should the user at this point watch your video or not?

## Make the Crate a Runtime Module
The cargo command has created the appropriate files and directories for us.

> Let's replace the contents of `lib.rs` in our new crate with the module template from `runtime/template.rs`. (You can also use `substrate-module-new` to create such a file.)

Reviewer: Wouldn't mention `substrate-module-new` unless you want to use it as the main tool for this step.

> Go ahead and compile your new crate with `cargo build`. It won't compile yet, because that template module has some dependencies from substrate itself. The compiler errors give you clues about what you need to include. We can just copy the relevant dependencies from the original node template runtime's `Cargo.toml`. Add these lines to your crate's `Cargo.toml`.

Reviewer: There is an existing `[dependencies]` tag which you should mention to remove?

Author: Irrelevant now that I'm using the template

```toml
[features]
default = ['std']
std = [
    'parity-codec/std',
    'support/std',
    'system/std',
]

[dependencies.parity-codec]
default-features = false
features = ['derive']
version = '3.5'

[dependencies.support]
default_features = false
git = 'https://github.com/paritytech/substrate.git'
package = 'srml-support'

> rev = 'bb68456966bf9d767651773dbaadd6787bce1884'

Reviewer: You should mention something about the `rev`, probably change to `<git-commit>` in the code and tell them to update it.

Author: I've switched it to branch = 'v1.0' like you did in the template and wrote some text about the options.

[dependencies.system]
default_features = false
git = 'https://github.com/paritytech/substrate.git'
package = 'srml-system'
rev = 'bb68456966bf9d767651773dbaadd6787bce1884'
```

At this point we have a runtime module that compiles. It comes with a test, so let's see if that test passes .
```bash
cargo test
```

> Turns out we'll need some additional dependencies to make the test pass. You can see this from the error messages, or by looking at the test module itself. Let's add `primitives`, `runtime-primitives`, and `runtime-io` as dev dependencies. The dev dependencies do not need to be listed as part of `std`. TODO is that even proper phrasing?

Reviewer: Probably should spend a small aside talking about dev dependencies. Why are these ones in dev dependencies and the others are not?

[dev-dependencies.runtime-primitives]
default_features = false
git = 'https://github.com/paritytech/substrate.git'
package = 'sr-primitives'
rev = 'bb68456966bf9d767651773dbaadd6787bce1884'

[dev-dependencies.runtime-io]
default_features = false
git = 'https://github.com/paritytech/substrate.git'
package = 'sr-io'
rev = 'bb68456966bf9d767651773dbaadd6787bce1884'
```

We're now good to go for this particular module. It will take a little experimentation to gain familiarity with what dependencies you need for each module you dream up. So the take-away from this section is not that `Cargo.toml` should always look like it did today. Rather, `Cargo.toml` needs to have the correct dependencies and you now know a few places to look for how to specify them when you get stuck.

## Add your Runtime Module to your Node
With our runtime module now compiling and passing tests (well, passing test anyway) we're ready to add it to our node template.

First we need to add our newly-created crate as a dependency in the node runtime's `Cargo.toml`.

```toml
[dependencies.test_module]
default_features = false
path = "../../test_module"
# Optionally specify a version
# version = "0.1.0"
```

> And remember to update the `std` section/

Reviewer: This should probably be written a bit more clearly and with explanation.

> ```toml

Reviewer: the toml tag is doing something weird

Author: This is what I see after `yarn start`. Did you see something different?
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2915325/60048379-02589300-969a-11e9-8ee5-96004751e75e.png)

Maybe it was related to that specific short snippet?

'test_module/std'
```

Next we'll update `runtime/lib.rs` in modular-chain to actually use the new runtime module. The lines that bring in the template module from when it was coded directly in the node runtime are still there, so we just need to update them in three places.

1. Remove `mod template` as we've already brought that dependency in via `Cargo.toml`
2. Update the trait implementation
```rust
/// Used for the module test_module
impl test_module::Trait for Runtime {
	type Event = Event;
}
```

3. Update `construct_runtime`
```rust
TestModule: test_module::{Module, Call, Storage, Event<T>},
```

## Appreciate your Work

> At this point you have the template module packaged up as it's own crate, and running as part of your `modular-node`. You can now run your chain with `./target/release/modular-chain --dev` and start the [Apps UI](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/explorer) to confirm that the module is working as expected. If you aren't familiar with the Apps UI, you will need to navigate to the settings tab, and select 'Local Node'.

Reviewer: You should probably mention the user needs to run `./scripts/build.sh` and `cargo build --release` and `purge-chain`

---

> title: "Write a Runtime Module in its Own Crate"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "Write a Runtime Module as a Rust crate"
```

---

In this tutorial, you'll write a Substrate runtime module that lives in its own crate, and include it in a node based on the node-template. If you prefer you can follow along with the [video walkthrough](todo record after initial feedback).

## Setup a Development Environment

> If you haven't already, follow the guide to [install substrate](getting-started/installing-substrate.md). You'll need the substrate-up scripts, but not the standard substrate node, so the `--fast` option is what you want here.

Reviewer: Why not just add the one-liner here?

Author: For the same reasons we discussed in https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-developer-hub.github.io/issues/123 . The install process could (and hopefully will eventually) change. This way we don't have to update them in every single tutorial, but rather in a single central place.

> ## Create a new Node Template

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Create your node
```

We'll begin by creating a brand new node template.
```bash

> substrate-node-new modular-chain <your name>

Reviewer: If the user follows this, then they need to either replace everything in the node template with `branch = 'v1.0` or they need to replace everything in the module template with `rev = <git-commit>`

```
If you've followed other runtime tutorials, you've probably started this way.

> In this tutorial, we're not going to write our module directly as part of the node template, but rather as a separate rust crate. This approach provides a few advantages:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, we're not going to write our module directly as part of the node template, but rather as a separate Rust crate. This approach provides a few advantages:
```

1. Our module can be easily imported into other nodes in the future.
2. Our module can be published to places like github or crates.io without publishing our entire node in the same place.

We do still need the node template, however, to actually run our module.

> ## Clone the Module Template Repository

Reviewer: I suggest that you be generous with subsections in general. Makes it easier to comb through the docs and link to relevant pieces of information.

So if our module isn't going to live in the node template, where _is_ it going to live? If you aren't familiar with library crates or how to use them in other rust projects, it's may be worth reading the [cargo docs](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/guide/creating-a-new-project.html).

While it's perfectly possible to create a new crate from scratch, the fastest way to get going with a new module is to clone the template repository.

```bash
git clone https://github.com/shawntabrizi/substrate-module-template
```

You should be able to immediately compile this template module with
```bash
cargo build --release
```

But before we jump straight to including our module in a runtime, let's take a look at the `Cargo.toml` file.

> After the standard naming and authorship information, we see a few lines about the `std` feature. Because substrate runtime code targets wasm, all the dependencies we use must be able to compile with `no_std`. Our `Cargo.toml` file begins by telling dependencies to only use their `std` feature when this module also uses its `std` feature. You will need to add each dependency you include here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the standard naming and authorship information, we see a few lines about the `std` feature, which enables use of [the Rust standard libraries](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/). Because Substrate runtime code targets Wasm, all the dependencies we use must be able to compile with [`no_std`](https://rust-embedded.github.io/book/intro/no-std.html). Our `Cargo.toml` file begins by telling dependencies to only use their `std` feature when this module also uses its `std` feature. You will need to add each dependency you include here.
```

```toml
[features]
default = ['std']
std = [
    'parity-codec/std',
    'support/std',
    'system/std',
]
```

> Our module will depend on low level features such as `system` and `support` from substrate itself. It will also be depended upon by a substrate-based runtime from above. So some care may be needed to ensure version compatibility on both sides. Substrate does not yet have releases published on crates.io, so instead we'll use git-based versioning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our module will depend on low level Substrate module libraries such as `system` and `support`. It will also be a dependency by the Substrate-based runtime from above. So some care may be needed to ensure version compatibility on both sides. Substrate does not yet have releases published on crates.io, so instead we need to use git-based versioning.
```

If you plan for third parties to use your module, you should develop against the `v1.0` branch as the template demonstrates. It is also acceptable to develop against specific git commit revisions.

```toml
# This dependency is published on crates.io so just use a version
[dependencies.parity-codec]
default-features = false
features = ['derive']
version = '3.5'

# These dependencies specify a git branch
[dependencies.support]
default_features = false
git = 'https://github.com/paritytech/substrate.git'
package = 'srml-support'
branch = 'v1.0'

[dependencies.system]
default_features = false
git = 'https://github.com/paritytech/substrate.git'
package = 'srml-system'
branch = 'v1.0'
# Could also use a specific revision
# rev = '<commit hash>'
```

> The final section of the `Cargo.toml` file specifies the dev dependencies, and is not necessary to make the template compile. Remove that final section to confirm this for yourself.

Reviewer: This section becomes really weird. Rather than have them remove it and get into an error, add it back, etc..., why not simply specify that `dev-dependencies` are those which are simply used by our tests:

https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/rust-by-example/testing/dev_dependencies.html

Author: I like learning by doing. I could just explain it instead of show it, but a user in a hurry could also just decide to take my work for it and not reproduce the error. There won't be much left to this beyond
1. substrate-node-new
2. clone template module
3. insert module in runtime
if we omit portions like this.

Author: Anyway, I've edited to de-emphasize that side exercise.

Add these lines back to your `Cargo.toml`.
```toml

[dev-dependencies.primitives]
default_features = false
git = 'https://github.com/paritytech/substrate.git'
package = 'substrate-primitives'
branch = 'v1.0'

[dev-dependencies.runtime-primitives]
default_features = false
git = 'https://github.com/paritytech/substrate.git'
package = 'sr-primitives'
branch = 'v1.0'

[dev-dependencies.runtime-io]
default_features = false
git = 'https://github.com/paritytech/substrate.git'
package = 'sr-io'
branch = 'v1.0'
```

It will take a little experimentation to gain familiarity with what dependencies you need for each module you dream up. So the take-away from this section is not that `Cargo.toml` should always look like it does in the template. Rather, `Cargo.toml` needs to have the correct dependencies and you now know how to specify them.

## Add your Runtime Module to your Node
With our runtime module now compiling and passing tests (well, passing test anyway) we're ready to add it to our node template.

First we need to add our newly-created crate as a dependency in the node runtime's `Cargo.toml`.

```toml
[dependencies.test_module]
default_features = false
path = "../../test_module"

> # Optionally specify a version

Reviewer: When would they want to do this?

Author: Removed. I guess it only makes sense if we had taught them to publish the module somewhere.

# version = "0.1.0"
```

And just as before, we need to tell the module to only build its `std` feature when the runtime itself does.
```toml
std = [
  ...
  'test_module/std',
]
```

Next we'll update `runtime/lib.rs` in modular-chain to actually use the new runtime module. The lines that bring in the template module that is coded directly in the node runtime are still there, so we just need to update them in three places.

> 1. Remove `mod template` as we've already brought that dependency in via `Cargo.toml`

Reviewer: The user does not need to remove the template module for this to work.

Author: I agree that it isn't strictly necessary. But I think it's wise for two reasons.
1. In general it's better to remove excess cruft than leave it around.
2. I'm trying to illustrate how things look _different_ between writing your module as part of your runtime vs writing it as an external crate. Removing that line emphasizes that we do that step differently now. It emphasizes that we do the stuff in cargo.toml _instead_ of `mod template`.

Reviewer: I still kind of disagree here. You have not for example removed the `template.rs` file from your project, and you say to "update" the definitions rather than simply write new ones.

I think the more common pattern for a user adding/creating a new module is that they would leave everything about their existing node the same, and simply add the new node on top of it.

If you want to make a statement about the `mod` thing you can, but also this is a little bit implied with the use of all the other modules used in the Substrate Node Template (and any minimal familiarity with Rust)

2. Update the trait implementation
```rust
/// Used for the module test_module
impl test_module::Trait for Runtime {
	type Event = Event;
}
```

3. Update `construct_runtime`
```rust
TestModule: test_module::{Module, Call, Storage, Event<T>},
```

## Appreciate your Work
At this point you have the template module packaged up as it's own crate, and included in your `modular-chain` runtime.

Build the `modular-chain` node with
```bash
./scripts/build.sh
cargo build --release
```

And run your node with
```bash
# Clear the data directory in case you've done this before
./target/release/modular-chain purge-chain --dev

# Start the chain
./target/release/modular-chain --dev
```

> Finally, start the [Apps UI](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/explorer) to confirm that the module is working as expected. If you aren't familiar with the Apps UI, you will need to navigate to the settings tab, and select 'Local Node'.

Reviewer: I think the lack of a "better link" in this section means we probably need a short guide on interacting with the Polkadot UI. We should talk to Jaco and team.

Author: Agreed. I was thinking of putting something like that in the "ecosystem tools" section of devhub. I would prefer not to block this PR on that though.

## Customize your Module

> In this tutorial you've learned to create a runtime module as a it's own crate. You're now ready to replace the template module logic with your own logic. If you're not sure what to code, check out one of our runtime module [tutorials](https://substrate.dev/en/tutorials).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this tutorial you've learned to create a runtime module as a Rust crate. You're now ready to replace the template module logic with your own logic. If you're not sure what to code, check out one of our runtime modules in [tutorials](https://substrate.dev/en/tutorials).
```
